.\" lispbar-modules(7) - lispbar module authoring guide
.TH LISPBAR-MODULES 7 "May 2026" "lispbar" "Miscellaneous"
.SH NAME
lispbar-modules \- built-in modules and how to write your own
.SH SYNOPSIS
.EX
;; ~/.config/lispbar/modules/MY-MODULE.lisp
(in-package :lispbar)

(defmodule :MY-NAME (:doc "..." :position :right
                     :priority 50 :interval 5.0
                     :on-click (...)
                     :tooltip  ...)
  ;; body returns string / plist / NIL
  )
.EE
.SH DESCRIPTION
A Lispbar module is a piece of state-producing code declared with
.BR defmodule .
Built-in modules live in
.IR @PREFIX@/share/doc/lispbar/modules.md ;
user modules live in
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/modules/*.lisp
and are loaded at startup with
.B *package*
bound to
.BR :lispbar .
.SH BUILT-IN MODULES
.PP
.TS
allbox tab(|);
l l l l.
NAME|SOURCE|DEFAULT POSITION|INTERVAL
:audio|wpctl > pactl > amixer|right|2 s
:battery|/sys/class/power_supply|right|30 s
:bluetooth|bluetoothctl|right|10 s
:brightness|brightnessctl > sysfs|right|10 s
:clock|local time|right|1 s
:cpu|/proc/loadavg|right|5 s
:launcher|(button)|left|60 s
:media|playerctl (MPRIS2)|center|3 s
:memory|/proc/meminfo|right|10 s
:network|nmcli > /proc > ip|right|5 s
:tray|StatusNotifierItem (D-Bus)|right|1 s
:workspaces|swaymsg/hyprctl/niri msg|left|0.5 s
.TE
.PP
List the live inventory:
.EX
$ lispbar --list-modules
.EE
.SH DEFMODULE KEYWORDS
.TP
.BR :doc " " \fISTRING\fR
Short description shown by
.BR --list-modules .
.TP
.BR :position " " \fIKEYWORD\fR
.BR :left ", " :center ", or " :right
\(em default section when the user puts this module name in their
placement lists.
.TP
.BR :priority " " \fIINT\fR
0\(en100, higher values render further left within a section.
.TP
.BR :interval " " \fISECONDS\fR
How often the body re-runs; the renderer caches the previous
output between ticks.
.TP
.BR :on-click " " \fIPLIST\fR
Maps button keywords to handlers.  See
.BR lispbar.conf (5).
.TP
.BR :tooltip " " \fIVALUE\fR
String, function-of-no-args, or symbol of such a function.  The
return value is rendered on a floating layer-shell surface below
the module while the pointer is over it.
.SH RETURN VALUE
The body runs each
.B interval
and must return one of:
.IP \(bu 2
.B nil
or
.B ""
\(em module hidden this tick.
.IP \(bu 2
.IB """string"""
\(em one fragment,
.B :normal
face.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR "(:text " \fI"X"\fB " :face " \fIFACE\fB ")"
\(em one fragment with a custom face.
.IP \(bu 2
.BR "(:fragments " \fIFRAGMENT-LIST\fB ")"
\(em multi-fragment output.
.SH FACES
.BR :bg ", " :normal ", " :accent ", " :ok ", " :warn ", " :urgent ", " :muted .
Themes map these to colours.
.SH HELPERS EXPORTED FOR MODULES
.TP
.BI run-capture " PROGRAM &rest ARGS"
Run external PROGRAM, return its stdout string on success, NIL otherwise.
.TP
.BI executable-find-check " NAME"
T if NAME is on $PATH.
.TP
.BI logmsg " LEVEL FMT &rest ARGS"
Write to stderr.  LEVEL is one of
.BR :debug ", " :info ", " :warn ", " :error .
.TP
.B lispbar-state-directory
Return
.IR $XDG_STATE_HOME/lispbar/ ,
creating it on first use.
.TP
.B lispbar-cache-directory
Return
.IR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/lispbar/ ,
creating it on first use.
.SH EXAMPLE
.EX
;; ~/.config/lispbar/modules/loadavg.lisp
(in-package :lispbar)

(defmodule :loadavg
  (:doc "5/15-minute CPU load average"
   :position :right :priority 58 :interval 5.0
   :on-click ((:left "xdg-open https://example.com/load"))
   :tooltip "hover for details")
  (when (probe-file "/proc/loadavg")
    (with-open-file (s "/proc/loadavg")
      (let* ((line (read-line s nil ""))
             (parts (uiop:split-string line :separator '(#\eSpace))))
        (when (>= (length parts) 3)
          (list :text (format nil "LOAD ~a ~a"
                              (second parts) (third parts))
                :face :muted))))))
.EE
Reference it from
.IR config.lisp :
.EX
(placement :right (:loadavg :cpu :memory :clock))
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lispbar (1),
.BR lispbar.conf (5),
.BR lispbar-themes (7).
.PP
Full reference:
.IR @PREFIX@/share/doc/lispbar/modules.md .
