.\" lispbar.conf(5) - lispbar configuration file format
.TH LISPBAR.CONF 5 "May 2026" "lispbar" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
lispbar.conf \- configuration file format for lispbar
.SH SYNOPSIS
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/config.lisp
.SH DESCRIPTION
The lispbar configuration file is a Common Lisp source file
evaluated in the
.B :lispbar
package, top to bottom, on startup.  Forms appear roughly in
sections matching the seeded default:
.IP \(bu 2
modules and placement,
.IP \(bu 2
geometry (position, height, margin, padding, gap, corner radius),
.IP \(bu 2
typography (font),
.IP \(bu 2
colour theme,
.IP \(bu 2
runtime behaviour (tick, output, log level),
.IP \(bu 2
per-module options
.RB ( setf
on exposed variables),
.IP \(bu 2
tooltip visuals,
.IP \(bu 2
custom-module click handlers.
.PP
The seeded default lives at
.I @PREFIX@/share/lispbar/examples/config.lisp
and is copied to
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/config.lisp
on first run.
.SH RECOGNISED TOP-LEVEL FORMS
.SS Placement
.EX
(placement :left   (\fIMODULE-NAMES\fR))
(placement :center (\fIMODULE-NAMES\fR))
(placement :right  (\fIMODULE-NAMES\fR))
.EE
Each list is the set of modules visible in that section.  Order
within the visible bar is by module priority (higher = further left).
.SS Geometry
.EX
(position :top|:bottom)        ; default :top
(height \fIN\fR)                       ; default 28
(margin \fIN\fR ...)                   ; CSS-style 1\(en4 values
(padding \fIN\fR)                      ; default 12
(gap \fIN\fR)                          ; default 12
(corner-radius \fIN\fR)                ; default 0 (sharp)
.EE
.SS Typography
.EX
(font \fI"PANGO DESCRIPTION"\fR)       ; e.g. "Sans 11"
.EE
.SS Theme
.EX
(theme \fI:NAME\fR)                    ; default :default
.EE
Built-in names:
.BR :default ", " :minimal ", " :nordish ", " :gruvboxish ", " :catppuccinish ", " :doomish .
.SS Runtime
.EX
(tick \fIS\fR)                         ; main-loop interval (s)
(output :wayland|:stdout|:json)
(log-level :debug|:info|:warn|:error)
.EE
.SS Per-module options
The remainder of the file is ordinary Lisp.  Tune any exposed
defvar with
.BR setf .
For example:
.EX
(setf *clock-format*       :hh-mm-ss)
(setf *workspaces-scope*   :current-output)
(setf *audio-on-click*     "pavucontrol")
(setf *audio-scroll-step*  5)
.EE
See
.BR lispbar-modules (7)
for the full list per module.
.SH MARGIN GRAMMAR
.EX
(margin 8)              ; 8 px every side
(margin 8 16)           ; vertical / horizontal
(margin 8 16 0)         ; top / horizontal / bottom
(margin 8 16 4 16)      ; top / right / bottom / left
.EE
.SH FRAGMENT API (for module return values)
Modules return one of:
.IP \(bu 2
.B nil
or empty string \(em module is hidden this tick.
.IP \(bu 2
.IR string " \(em"
one fragment in
.B :normal
face.
.IP \(bu 2
.BI "(:text """ TEXT """ :face " FACE ")"
\(em one fragment, custom face.
.IP \(bu 2
.BI "(:fragments (" FRAGMENT-LIST "))"
\(em multiple fragments.
.PP
Each fragment in the list takes one of these shapes:
.EX
("plain text" \fI:face\fR)
(:gap \fIPIXELS-OR-NIL\fR)
(:clickable :text \fI"X"\fR :face \fI:accent\fR
            :on-click \fIHANDLER\fR :data \fIDATA\fR)
.EE
The
.B :clickable
fragment has its bounding box recorded per-output and clicks
inside it dispatch to its own handler before falling through to
the module-level
.BR :on-click .
.SH CLICK HANDLER VALUES
.B :on-click
is a property list mapping button keywords to handler values.
.PP
Button keys:
.BR :left ", " :right ", " :middle ", " :side ", " :extra ", " :scroll-up ", " :scroll-down .
.PP
Handler value can be any of:
.TP
.I nil
no-op
.TP
.IR """string"""
shell command, run via
.BR "sh -c" .
.TP
.IR (""argv1"" " " ""argv2"" " " ...)
argv list, run directly.
.TP
.I symbol
named function, called with
.IB ( MODULE
.IB BUTTON
.IB OUTPUT-IDX )\fR.
.TP
.IB # ' function
same arity as symbol form.
.SH EXAMPLE
Minimal config:
.EX
;; ~/.config/lispbar/config.lisp
(placement :left  (:workspaces))
(placement :right (:cpu :memory :audio :network :battery :clock))

(theme         :catppuccinish)
(font          "Sans 11")
(margin        8 12 0 12)
(corner-radius 12)
(output        :wayland)
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lispbar (1),
.BR lispbar-modules (7),
.BR lispbar-themes (7).
.PP
Full reference:
.IR @PREFIX@/share/doc/lispbar/configuration.md .
