.\" lispbar(1) - native Wayland status bar in Common Lisp
.TH LISPBAR 1 "May 2026" "lispbar" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lispbar \- native Wayland status bar in Common Lisp
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lispbar
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lispbar
is a status bar for Wayland compositors that speak the
.I wlr-layer-shell-unstable-v1
protocol (Sway, Hyprland, niri, river, Wayfire, KDE Plasma Wayland,
and other wlroots-based compositors).  Configuration is a Lisp
file, modules and themes are Lisp files; the bar is a single
native binary produced by SBCL.
.PP
On first launch lispbar creates
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/ ,
seeds a default
.IR config.lisp ,
and starts rendering.  Every option is documented inline in the
seeded file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-config " " \fIPATH\fR
Use
.I PATH
instead of the XDG-discovered config file.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " " \fIKIND\fR
Override the
.B (output)
config form for this invocation.
.I KIND
is one of
.BR stdout ", " json ", or " wayland .
.TP
.B \-\-once
Render one frame and exit.  Useful in pipelines and scripts.
.TP
.B \-\-init
Seed
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/config.lisp ,
.IR modules/ ,
and
.IR themes/
explicitly.  Refuses if the config already exists; combine with
.B \-\-force
to overwrite.
.TP
.B \-\-force
Used with
.B \-\-init
to overwrite an existing config.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-seed
Skip the automatic first-run seeding (equivalent to setting
.B LISPBAR_NO_SEED
in the environment).
.TP
.B \-\-list\-modules
Print every registered module (built-ins + user extensions) and
exit.
.TP
.B \-\-list\-themes
Print every registered theme and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-extensions
Print which user
.I .lisp
files were loaded from the XDG search path and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-print\-paths
Print the resolved XDG paths and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-verbose
Enable
.B :debug
log level.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print short usage and exit.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B registry \fISUBCMD\fR " " [\fIOPTIONS\fR]
Browse and install community-contributed modules and themes from the
official upstream registry (curated by the project, fetched live from
.IR https://github.com/theesfeld/lispbar/tree/master/registry ).
.I SUBCMD
is one of:
.RS
.IP "\fBlist\fR [\fB--kind\fR \fImodule|theme\fR]" 4
List every item in the registry.  Items already installed are marked
with
.BR * .
.IP "\fBinfo\fR \fINAME\fR" 4
Show metadata for one item:  source URL, SHA-256, author, runtime
dependencies, and install status.
.IP "\fBinstall\fR \fINAME\fR" 4
Download
.I NAME
from the registry, verify its SHA-256 against the manifest, and place
it under
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/modules/
or
.IR themes/ .
.IP "\fBremove\fR \fINAME\fR" 4
Delete an installed item and forget it in the bookkeeping.
.IP "\fBupdate\fR" 4
Refresh every installed item.  Re-downloads any whose SHA-256 has
changed in the upstream manifest.
.PP
.I NAME
is a keyword like
.BR :weather " or " :tokyo-night .
The leading colon is optional on the command line.  Global flags such
as
.B \-c
and
.B \-v
may appear on either side of
.BR registry .
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
Wayland socket name (standard).
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Defaults to
.IR ~/.config .
The bar looks at
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/config.lisp
first.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_DIRS
Colon-separated list of fallback config roots.  Defaults to
.IR /etc/xdg .
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Defaults to
.IR ~/.local/share .
Searched for additional module and theme files.
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_DIRS
Defaults to
.IR /usr/local/share:/usr/share .
Searched for additional module and theme files.
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Per-user state directory.  Modules may write under
.IR $XDG_STATE_HOME/lispbar/ .
.TP
.B XDG_CACHE_HOME
Per-user cache directory.  Tray icon PNGs are cached under
.IR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/lispbar/icons/ .
.TP
.B SWAYSOCK ", " HYPRLAND_INSTANCE_SIGNATURE ", " NIRI_SOCKET
Compositor IPC sockets.  The
.B :workspaces
module uses whichever it finds.
.TP
.B LISPBAR_NO_SEED
When set non-empty, suppresses first-run seeding of
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/ .
.SH FILES
.TP
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/config.lisp
Main configuration file.  See
.BR lispbar.conf (5).
.TP
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/modules/*.lisp
User-defined modules.  See
.BR lispbar-modules (7).
.TP
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lispbar/themes/*.lisp
User-defined themes.  See
.BR lispbar-themes (7).
.TP
.IR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/lispbar/icons/
SVG-to-PNG conversion cache for tray icons.  Safe to delete.
.TP
.IR $XDG_CACHE_HOME/lispbar/registry-manifest.lisp
Cached copy of the registry manifest.  Refreshed by the
.B registry
subcommand when older than
.BR *registry-cache-ttl* .
.TP
.IR $XDG_STATE_HOME/lispbar/registry-installed.lisp
Bookkeeping for items installed via
.BR "lispbar registry install" .
Rewritten on every install/remove; safe to delete (you'll lose the
ability to
.B registry update
or
.B remove
items but the files themselves stay put).
.TP
.I @PREFIX@/share/lispbar/examples/
Example user config and example user module/theme files.
.TP
.I @PREFIX@/share/doc/lispbar/
Full markdown documentation set.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT ", " SIGTERM
Clean shutdown.  All layer surfaces are destroyed and the D-Bus
connection released before the process exits.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
0
Normal exit.
.TP
130
Interrupted by signal (SIGINT / SIGTERM).
.TP
1
Fatal error during startup or main loop.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lispbar.conf (5),
.BR lispbar-modules (7),
.BR lispbar-themes (7).
.PP
Full markdown documentation:
.IR @PREFIX@/share/doc/lispbar/index.md .
.SH AUTHORS
Lispbar contributors.
.SH LICENSE
GPL-3.0-or-later.
